Update quantization readme (#24133)
ggml-org/llama.cpp: tools/quantize/README.md

This process however, may introduce some accuracy loss which is usually measured in [Perplexity](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/perplexity) (ppl) and/or [Kullback–Leibler Divergence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kullback%E2%80%93Leibler_divergence) (kld).
This can be minimized by using a suitable imatrix file.

You can also use the [GGUF-my-repo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/ggml-org/gguf-my-repo) space on Hugging Face to build your own quants without any setup. It syncs from llama.cpp `main` every 6 hours.

## Overview

Quantization is done in two phases:
- Convert the original model to GGUF format.
- Quantize the converted GGUF file.

If the model supports multimodal inputs (images or audio), you also need to convert and quantize the multimodal encoders and projectors.

## Prepare the input GGUF file

> To convert a model from a Hugging Face repo, you can use a command like the following:

Author: I removed the installation from `requirements` because the files include `requirements-convert_legacy_llama.txt` and this attempts to install old versions of packages that could not be resolved in my system. I just installed the following I think:

```
transformers>=5
sentencepiece
gguf>=0.1.0
protobuf>=4.21.0,<5.0.0
```

Updating the requirements files sounded like a more delicate change, let me know how to proceed with this.

Reviewer: We recently downgraded to `transformers` 4.x (thus breaking Gemma conversion) because various versions of 5.x break other models' tokenizer (and our CI), either way I recommend you use a venv to avoid conflicts.

Author: Yes, I used a venv; it was more a question about what to do here. I installed a fresh venv with Python 3.12 and the root `requirements.txt` did not install, I had not attempted to convert G4 yet. I'll check again in case I did something wrong.

Author: Sorry for missing the intentional downgrade though.

Reviewer: What issue did you have, works fine here with `3.12.3`:
```
Successfully installed MarkupSafe-3.0.3 aiohttp-3.9.5 aiosignal-1.4.0 annotated-doc-0.0.4 annotated-types-0.7.0 anyio-4.13.0 attrs-26.1.0 certifi-2026.5.20 charset_normalizer-3.4.7 click-8.4.1 contourpy-1.3.3 cycler-0.12.1 distro-1.9.0 filelock-3.29.1 fonttools-4.63.0 frozenlist-1.8.0 fsspec-2026.4.0 gguf-0.19.0 h11-0.16.0 hf-xet-1.5.0 httpcore-1.0.9 httpx-0.28.1 huggingface-hub-0.36.2 idna-3.18 iniconfig-2.3.0 jinja2-3.1.6 jiter-0.15.0 kiwisolver-1.5.0 markdown-it-py-4.2.0 matplotlib-3.10.9 mdurl-0.1.2 mpmath-1.3.0 multidict-6.7.1 networkx-3.6.1 numpy-1.26.4 openai-2.14.0 packaging-26.2 pandas-2.2.3 pillow-12.2.0 pluggy-1.6.0 prometheus-client-0.20.0 propcache-0.5.2 protobuf-4.25.9 pydantic-2.13.4 pydantic-core-2.46.4 pygments-2.20.0 pyparsing-3.3.2 pytest-8.3.5 python-dateutil-2.9.0.post0 pytz-2026.2 pyyaml-6.0.3 regex-2026.5.9 requests-2.32.5 rich-15.0.0 safetensors-0.7.0 seaborn-0.13.2 sentencepiece-0.2.1 setuptools-81.0.0 shellingham-1.5.4 six-1.17.0 sniffio-1.3.1 sympy-1.14.0 tokenizers-0.22.2 torch-2.11.0+cpu tqdm-4.67.3 transformers-4.57.6 typer-0.24.2 typing-extensions-4.15.0 typing-inspection-0.4.2 tzdata-2026.2 urllib3-2.7.0 wget-3.2 yarl-1.24.2
```

Reviewer: Anyway in the case of Gemma (provided the initial install works for you), manually updating `transformers` afterwards should work fine.

Author: It's apparently about the index resolution strategy used by `uv pip` vs `pip`. I'll restore the install line, sorry for the noise.

Author: Added pip install instructions.

This can be minimized by using a suitable imatrix file.

You can also use the [GGUF-my-repo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/ggml-org/gguf-my-repo) space on Hugging Face to build your own quants without any setup. It syncs from llama.cpp `main` every 6 hours.

## Overview

Quantization is done in two phases:
- Convert the original model to GGUF format.
- Quantize the converted GGUF file.

If the model supports multimodal inputs (images or audio), you also need to convert and quantize the multimodal encoders and projectors.

To perform these tasks, you need to install the Python requirements:

```bash
python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Or if you use `uv`:

```bash
uv pip install -r requirements.txt --index-strategy unsafe-best-match
```

## Prepare the input GGUF file

To convert a model from a Hugging Face repo, you can use a command like the following:

```
python convert_hf_to_gguf.py --outfile gemma-4-E2B-it-bf16.gguf --outtype bf16 --remote google/gemma-4-E2B-it
```

Notes:
- In the usual case where the model is distributed in 16-bit format, `--outtype auto` also works well.

> - If you have previously download the model locally, specify the directory and remove the `--remote` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the usual case where the model is distributed in 16-bit format, `--outtype auto` (or omitting `--outtype` entirely) also works well.
- If you have previously downloaded the model locally, specify the directory and remove the `--remote` flag.
```

- For compatibility reasons, the Python requirements install transformers 4, but more and more models (like Gemma 4) require transformers 5. You can safely `pip install -U transformers` to get the latest version.

## Quantize the GGUF

After you have created a high-quality GGUF version of the model, you use `llama-quantize` to apply quantization. For example, quantize to `Q4_K_M` using a command like the following:

```bash
./build/bin/llama-quantize gemma-4-E2B-it-bf16.gguf gemma-4-E2B-it-Q4_K_M.gguf Q4_K_M
```

Various quantization methods are described [later in this document](#quantize).

Options:
* `--allow-requantize` allow requantizing tensors that have already been quantized. Warning: This can severely reduce quality compared to quantizing from 16bit or 32bit
* `--leave-output-tensor` leave output.weight un(re)quantized. Increases model size but may also increase quality, especially when requantizing
* `--pure` disable k-quant mixtures and quantizes all tensors to the same type
* `--imatrix file_name` use data in file_name as importance matrix for quant optimizations
* `--include-weights tensor_name` use importance matrix for these tensors

> * `--exclude-weights tensor_names` use importance matrix for tensors not in this list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `--include-weights tensor_name` use importance matrix for this tensor (can be specified multiple times)
* `--exclude-weights tensor_name` use importance matrix for the tensors **not** specified (include/exclude cannot be mixed)
```

Author: Thanks, much clearer this way 👍
